Tutorial on Mutability and Imperative Programming (#1529)
ocaml/ocaml.org: data/tutorials/language/0it_06_imperative.md

Here is the second implementation:
```ocaml
# let get_char () =
    let open Unix in
    let termio = tcgetattr stdin in
    tcsetattr stdin TCSAFLUSH
      { termio with c_icanon = false; c_echo = false };
    let c = input_char (in_channel_of_descr stdin) in
    tcsetattr stdin TCSAFLUSH termio;
    c;;
val get_char : unit -> char = <fun>
```

In this implementation, the record returned by the call to `tcgetattr` is not modified. A copy is made using `{ termio with c_icanon = false; c_echo = false }`. This copy only differs from the `termio` value on fields `c_icanon` and `c_echo`, which is the meaning of `termio with …`

In the second call to `tcsetattr`, we restore the terminal attributes to their initial state without explicitly reading them.

## Imperative Control Flow

OCaml provides a sequence operator `;` that allows chaining expressions, as well as `for` loops and `while` loops, which execute a block of code repeatedly.

### Sequence Operator

**`let … in`**

```ocaml
# let () = print_string "This is" in print_endline " really Disco!";;
This is really Disco!
- : unit = ()
```

Using the `let … in` construct means two things:

> * Names may be bound (in the example, no name is bound since the )

Reviewer: This sentence is incomplete

* Side effects take place in sequence. The bound expression (here `print_string "This is"`) is evaluated first, and the referring expression (here `print_endline " really Disco!"`) is evaluated second.

**Semicolon**
The single semicolon `;` operator is known as the _sequence_ operator. It allows you to evaluate multiple expressions in order, with the last expression's value as the entire sequence's value.

The values of any previous expressions are discarded. Thus, it makes sense to use expressions with side effects, except for the last expression of the sequence, which could be free of side effects.

```ocaml
# let _ =
  print_endline "Hello,";
  print_endline "world!";
  42;;
Hello,
world!
- : int = 42
```
In this example, the first two expressions are `print_endline` function calls, which produce side effects (printing to the console), and the last expression is simply the integer `42`, which becomes the value of the entire sequence. The `;` operator is used to separate these expressions.

> **Remark** Even thought it's called the sequence operator, the semicolon is not truly an operator because it is not a function of type `unit -> 'a -> 'a`. It is rather a _construct_ of the language. That allows terminating sequences with a semicolon, which is ignored.

Reviewer: Please check my revision here to ensure it's still accurate. 🙂

for i = start_value to end_value do body done
```
has a loop variable `i` that starts at `start_value` and is incremented until it reaches `end_value`. This evaluates the `body` expression (which may contain `i`) on every iteration. Here, `for`, `to`, `do`, and `done` are keywords used to declare the loop.

The type of a `for` loop expression is `unit`.
```ocaml
# for i = 0 to 5 do Printf.printf "%i\n" i done;;
0
1
2
3
4
5
- : unit = ()
```

The loop variable `i` is incremented after every iteration. It starts with value `0` and ends with value `5`.

The body of a `for` loop must be an expression of type `unit`:
```ocaml
# let j = [| 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8 |];;
val j : int array = [|2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8|]

# for i = Array.length a - 1 downto 0 do 0 done;;
Line 1, characters 39-40:
Warning 10 [non-unit-statement]: this expression should have type unit.
- : unit = ()
```

When you use the `downto` keyword (instead of the `to` keyword), the counter decreases on every iteration of the loop.

For example, `for` loops are convenient for iterating over and modifying arrays:
```ocaml
# let sum = ref 0 in
  for i = 0 to Array.length j - 1 do sum := !sum + j.(i) done;
  !sum;;
- : int = 42

> ```

Reviewer: Please check this rearrangement. I did it per @cuihtlauac's instruction in Slack DM, but I might have misunderstood.

Also, I get the result of `35` here, not `42`.

**Note:** Here is how to do the same thing using an iterator function:
```ocaml
# let sum = ref 0 in Array.iter (fun i -> sum := !sum + i) a; !sum;;

> - : int = 42

Reviewer: Also get `35` here instead of `42` because I do above. 🙂

```

### While Loop

A `while` loop has the syntax
```ocaml
while condition do body done
```
and continues to execute the `body` expression as long as `condition` remains true. Here, `while`, `do`, and `done` are keywords used to declare the `while` loop.

The type of a `while` loop expression is `unit`.
```ocaml
# let i = ref 0 in
  while !i < 5 do
    Printf.printf "%i\n" !i;
    i := !i + 1;
  done;;
0
1
2
3
4
- : unit = ()
```

In this example, the `while` loop continues to execute as long as the value held by the reference `i` is less than `5`.

### Breaking Loops Using Exceptions

Throwing the `Exit` exception is a recommended way to exit immediately from a loop.

The following example uses the `get_char` function we defined earlier (in the section [Example: `get_char` Function](#example-getchar-function)).
```ocaml
# try
    print_endline "Press Escape to exit";
    while true do
      let c = get_char () in
      if c = '\027' then raise Exit;
      print_char c;
      flush stdout
    done
  with Exit -> ();;
```

> This `while` loop echoes characters typed on the keyboard. When the ASCII `Escape` character is read, the `Exit` exception is thrown, returning `- : unit = ()`.

Reviewer: Please review my revisions here, @cuihtlauac, to ensure it's still accurate.

```ocaml
# let record_char state c =
    (String.make 1 c, c :: state);;
val record_char : char list -> char -> string * char list = <fun>

# let remove_char state =
    ("\b \b", if state = [] then [] else List.tl state);;
val remove_char : 'a list -> string * 'a list = <fun>

# let state_to_string state =
    List.(state |> rev |> to_seq |> String.of_seq);;
val state_to_string : char list -> string = <fun>

# let rec loop state =
    let c = get_char () in
    if c = '\004' || c = '\n' || c = '\r' then raise Exit;
    let s, new_state = match c with
      | '\127' -> remove_char !state
      | c when c >= ' ' -> record_char !state c
      | _ -> ("", !state) in
    print_string s;
    state := new_state;
    flush stdout;
    loop state;;
val loop : char list ref -> 'a = <fun>

# let state = ref [] in try loop state with Exit -> state_to_string !state;;

> ```

Reviewer: Since this doesn't return anything but just leaves a space for more input, should we mention that or clarify it's necessary to return twice to get back to the prompt?

Author: I need to fix offline

Author: We need to say something like:
> Type and edit any single line text, and then press return to get back to the repl

This example illustrates the following:
- The functions `record_char` and `remove_char` neither update the state nor produce side effects. Instead, they each return a pair of values consisting of a string to print and the next state, `new_state`.

> - I/O and state-update side effects happen inside the `loop` function.

Reviewer: Is my revision of "state-update side effects" correct? Before it said "state update side effects happen..." 

I stumbled on the sentence wondering if it was:
- states update side effects
- `state` updates side effects
- `state updates` side effects
Can we clarify this? ... same in li.488

- The state is passed as a parameter to the `loop` function.

> This is a possible way to handle an application-wide state. As in the [Function-Encapsulated Mutability](#good-function-encapsulated-mutability) example, state-aware code is contained in a narrow scope; the rest of the code is purely functional.

Reviewer: Same question as li.483.

However, instead of precomputing everything, memoization uses a cache that is populated when calling the function. Either, the provided parameters
* are found in the cache (it is a hit) and the stored result is returned, or they
* are not found in the cache (it's a miss), and the result is computed, stored in the cache, and returned.

You can find a concrete example of memoization and a more in-depth explanation in the chapter on [Memoization](https://cs3110.github.io/textbook/chapters/ds/memoization.html) of "OCaml Programming: Correct + Efficient + Beautiful."

<!-- FIXME: reference CS3110 memoization documented on ocaml.org after it is merged -->

### Good: Functional by Default

By default, OCaml programs should be written in a mostly functional style. This constitutes trying to avoid side effects where possible and relying on immutable data instead of mutable state.

It is possible to use an imperative programming style without losing the benefits of type and memory safety. However, it doesn't usually make sense to only program in an imperative style. Not using functional programming idioms at all would result in non-idiomatic OCaml code.

> Most existing modules provide an interface meant to be used in functional way. Some would require the development and maintenance of [wrapper libraries](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wrapper_library) to be used in an imperative setting and such use would in many cases be inefficient.

Reviewer: If it's inefficient, should it be mentioned here?

# Hashtbl.clear;;
- : ('a, 'b) Hashtbl.t -> unit = <fun>
```

On the other hand, a module may define mutable data internally impacting its behaviour without exposing it in its interface. This is inadvisable.

### Bad: Undocumented Mutation

Here's an example of bad code:
```ocaml
# let partition p k =
    let m = Array.copy k in
    let k_len = ref 0 in
    let m_len = ref 0 in
    for i = 0 to Array.length k - 1 do
      if p k.(i) then begin
        k.(!k_len) <- k.(i);
        incr k_len
      end else begin
        m.(!m_len) <- k.(i);
        incr m_len
      end
    done;
    (Array.truncate k_len k, Array.truncate m_len m);;
Error: Unbound value Array.truncate
```

**Note:** This example will not run in the REPL, since the function `Array.truncate` is not defined.

To understand why this is bad code, assume that the function `Array.truncate` has type `int -> 'a array -> 'a array`. It behaves such that `Array.truncate 3 [5; 6; 7; 8; 9]` returns `[5; 6; 7]`, and the returned array physically corresponds to the 3 first cells of the input array.

The type of `partition` would be `('a -> bool) -> 'a array -> 'a array * 'a array`, and it could be documented as:

> > `partition p k` returns a pair of arrays `(m, n)` where `m` is an array containing all the elements of `k` that satisfy the predicate `p`, and `n` is an array containing the elements of `k` that do not satisfy `p`. The order of the elements from the input array is preserved.

Reviewer: `n` (formerly `c`) isn't in the above example. Is this intended? Will the reader understand?

2
3
4
5
- : unit = ()
```

Here:

> - `!i < 5` is the condition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `!i <= 5` is the condition.
```
Should this have the `=` too?

- The expression ` Printf.printf "%i\n" !i; i := !i + 1;` is the body of the loop

> The iteration executes the body as long as the condition remains true.

Reviewer: executes the expression, perhaps? Have we used "body" in this context before?

Author: body expression

  with Exit -> ();;
```

> This `while` loop echoes characters typed on the keyboard. When the ASCII `Escape` character is read, the `Exit` exception is thrown, which terminates the iteration and triggers the display of the reply from the REPL: `- : unit = ()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `while` loop echoes characters typed on the keyboard. When the ASCII `Escape` character is read, the `Exit` exception is thrown, which terminates the iteration and displays the REPL reply: `- : unit = ()`.
```

Error: Unbound module Analytics
```

**Note:** This code will not run because there is no module called `Analytics`. [Analytics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_analytics) are remote monitoring libraries.

A module called `Array` is defined; it shadows and includes the [`Stdlib.Array`](/api/Array.html) module. See the [Module Inclusion](docs/modules#module-inclusion) part of the [Modules](docs/modules) tutorial for details about this pattern.

> To understand why this code is bad, figure out that `Analytics.`collect` is a function that makes a network connection to transmit data to a remote server.

Reviewer: Is `Analytics.collect` not correct? Should it be `Analytics` `connect` or Analytics `collect`?

Author: No back tick in the middle
